 Abortion in the United States Virgin Islands - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Legal status 2 Abortion clinics 3 History 4 Contraceptives 5 References Toggle the table of contents Abortion in the United States Virgin Islands 1 language Igbo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Switch to legacy parser Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Abortion in the United States Virgin Islands is legal on request up to 24 weeks of pregnancy, and afterwards only in cases that endanger the life or health of the mother. There are five clinics providing abortion in the territory. Women travel from the British Virgin Islands for abortions because it is illegal there. Legal status [ edit ] Abortion is allowed in the United States Virgin Islands on request up to 24 weeks of pregnancy, and afterwards only in cases that endanger the life or health of the mother. Abortion may only be performed by a licensed physician, and after 12 weeks of pregnancy only by a surgeon or gynecologist at a hospital. [ 1 ] Abortion clinics [ edit ] As of 2019 [ update ] , there are five clinics providing abortion in the U.S. Virgin Islands. One is in St. Thomas , one is in St. Croix , and three are in St. John . [ 2 ] History [ edit ] Women from the British Virgin Islands who want an abortion were traveling to St. Thomas in the U.S. Virgin Islands in 2016 to get an abortion because abortion is illegal in the British Virgin Islands. [ 3 ] Pregnant women in the U.S. Virgin Islands were at risk of getting the Zika virus , which causes major fetal defects. These defects can be so severe that health care professionals recommend termination of the pregnancy. [ 4 ] Contraceptives [ edit ] As of 1994, the U.S. Virgin Islands included family planning services as part of their Medicaid program. These services included contraceptive services and supplies, and sterilizations . [ 5 ] References [ edit ] ↑ Abortion , 2019 US Virgin Islands Code, Title 14 § 151. ↑ Worrell, Marc. "U.S. Virgin Islands (Saint Croix, Saint John, Saint Thomas)" . Women on Waves (in Italian) . Retrieved May 29, 2019 . ↑ "In the Caribbean, crossing borders by land and sea for safe abortions" . Reuters . May 26, 2016 . Retrieved May 29, 2019 . ↑ Gani, Aisha (January 29, 2016). "Zika virus: the options facing pregnant women across Latin America" . The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved May 29, 2019 . ↑ Sollom, Terry; Gold, Rachel Benson; Saul, Rebekah (April 24, 2008). "Public Funding for Contraceptive, Sterilization and Abortion Services, 1994" . Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health . 28 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 . v t e Abortion in the United States by state States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal district Washington, D.C. Territories American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands v t e Abortion in North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abortion_in_the_United_States_Virgin_Islands&oldid=1369867871 " Categories : Politics of the United States Virgin Islands Society of the United States Virgin Islands Abortion in insular areas of the United States Abortion in the Caribbean Health in the United States Virgin Islands Women in the United States Virgin Islands Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Use American English from August 2026 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2019 All articles containing potentially dated statements CS1 Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 17 August 2026, at 17:59 (UTC) . Page was rendered with Parsoid . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Legal & safety contacts Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abortion in the United States Virgin Islands 1 language Add topic 