 § 18.2-74. When abortion or termination of pregnancy lawful after second trimester of pregnancy Virginia General Assembly / LIS Learning Center / Privacy Policy / LIS home / Register Account / Login Session Information Bills & Resolutions State Budget Virginia Law Reports to the General Assembly Virginia Law Select Search Type All Code of Virginia Administrative Code Constitution Charters Authorities Compacts Uncodified Acts Code of Virginia Table of Contents » Title 18.2. Crimes and Offenses Generally » Chapter 4. Crimes Against the Person » Article 9. Abortion » § 18.2-74. When abortion or termination of pregnancy lawful after second trimester of pregnancy Section Print PDF email Creating a Report: Check the sections you'd like to appear in the report, then use the "Create Report" button at the bottom of the page to generate your report. Once the report is generated you'll then have the option to download it as a pdf, print or email the report. Code of Virginia Title 18.2. Crimes and Offenses Generally Chapter 4. Crimes Against the Person 10/2/2026 § 18.2-74 . When abortion or termination of pregnancy lawful after second trimester of pregnancy. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of § 18.2-71 and in addition to the provisions of §§ 18.2-72 and 18.2-73 , it shall be lawful for any physician licensed by the Board of Medicine to practice medicine and surgery to terminate or attempt to terminate a human pregnancy or aid or assist in the termination of a human pregnancy by performing an abortion or causing a miscarriage on any woman in a stage of pregnancy subsequent to the second trimester provided the following conditions are met: (a) Said operation is performed in a hospital licensed by the Virginia State Department of Health or operated by the Department of Behavioral Health and Developmental Services. (b) The physician and two consulting physicians certify and so enter in the hospital record of the woman, that in their medical opinion, based upon their best clinical judgment, the continuation of the pregnancy is likely to result in the death of the woman or substantially and irremediably impair the mental or physical health of the woman. (c) Measures for life support for the product of such abortion or miscarriage must be available and utilized if there is any clearly visible evidence of viability. 1975, cc. 14, 15; 2009, cc. 813 , 840 . The chapters of the acts of assembly referenced in the historical citation at the end of this section may not constitute a comprehensive list of such chapters and may exclude chapters whose provisions have expired. Section Code of Virginia Popular Names 2026 Updates Section Look Up Go Administrative Code Constitution of Virginia Charters Authorities Compacts Uncodified Acts Virginia Law Library The Code of Virginia, Constitution of Virginia, Charters, Authorities, Compacts and Uncodified Acts are available in both PDF and CSV formats. Helpful Resources Virginia Code Commission Virginia Register of Regulations U.S. Constitution For Developers The Virginia Law website data is available via a web service. Sign In Username: Password: Cancel LIS Home Lobbyist-in-a-Box Privacy Policy © Copyright Commonwealth of Virginia, . All rights reserved. Site developed by the Division of Legislative Automated Systems (DLAS) . Sign In 