 State Bans on Abortion Throughout Pregnancy | Guttmacher Institute Skip to main content Search Expand Search Search Facebook Instagram Youtube LinkedIn Contact Our Work Highlights Reproductive Health Impact Study Adding It Up Abortion Worldwide Guttmacher-Lancet Commission US policy resources State policy resources International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health (1975–2020) Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health (1969–2020) Reports Global United States Articles Global research US research Policy analysis Guttmacher Policy Review Opinion Fact Sheets Global United States US State Laws and Policies Tools Interactive Map: US Abortion Policies and Access After Roe Safe Abortion Calculator Family Planning Investment Impact Calculator Monthly Abortion Provision Study Dashboard Public-use data sets Topics Global Abortion Contraception Pregnancy Teens US Abortion Contraception Pregnancy Teens Regions Our Work by Geography Global Africa Asia Europe Latin America & the Caribbean Northern America Oceania About Who We Are About Staff Board Job opportunities Newsletter History Contact Conflict of Interest Policy Media Media office News releases Videos Support Our Work Make a gift today Monthly Giving Circle Ways to Give Guttmacher Guardians Guttmacher Legacy Circle Financials Impact Report 2025 Awards & Scholarships Darroch Award Richards Scholarship Bixby Fellowship Donate Donate Menu Search Our Work Highlights Reproductive Health Impact Study Adding It Up Abortion Worldwide Guttmacher-Lancet Commission US policy resources State policy resources International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health (1975–2020) Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health (1969–2020) Reports Global United States Articles Global research US research Policy analysis Guttmacher Policy Review Opinion Fact Sheets Global United States US State Laws and Policies Tools Interactive Map: US Abortion Policies and Access After Roe Safe Abortion Calculator Family Planning Investment Impact Calculator Monthly Abortion Provision Study Dashboard Public-use data sets Topics Global Abortion Contraception Pregnancy Teens US Abortion Contraception Pregnancy Teens Regions Our Work by Geography Global Africa Asia Europe Latin America & the Caribbean Northern America Oceania About Who We Are About Staff Board Job opportunities Newsletter History Contact Conflict of Interest Policy Media Media office News releases Videos Support Our Work Make a gift today Monthly Giving Circle Ways to Give Guttmacher Guardians Guttmacher Legacy Circle Financials Impact Report 2025 Awards & Scholarships Darroch Award Richards Scholarship Bixby Fellowship Donate Facebook Instagram Youtube LinkedIn Contact State Laws and Policies As of September 2, 2026 State Bans on Abortion Throughout Pregnancy The information provided on this website is not intended to, and does not, constitute legal advice. All information, content and materials available on this site are for general informational purposes only. Information on this website may not constitute the most up-to-date legal or other information. We encourage anyone with legal questions to contact a licensed attorney. Background This fact sheet was written by Talia Curhan. It was edited by Peter Ephross. The landscape of abortion access in the United States continues to shift rapidly in the wake of the Supreme Court’s June 2022 ruling in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization , which overturned Roe v. Wade and eliminated the federal constitutional right to abortion. Since then, many state legislatures have created new abortion restrictions and bans, and many have begun enforcing existing ones. Despite these bans, people can still access abortion care via telehealth from states with shield laws or by traveling to another state. Research has long indicated that abortion bans of all types have the greatest impact on people in marginalized groups. Individuals who face systemic racism and other forms of oppression may encounter compounding barriers to obtaining an abortion . Many state laws provide some limited exceptions to total bans and bans based on gestational duration. These exceptions are often described as compromises, but they obscure the harm of abortion bans . Most exceptions are designed to be unworkable, containing vague and contradictory language and imposing cumbersome requirements. The abortion restrictions detailed below represent some of the ways state laws and policies may prohibit or restrict a person’s access to abortion care. Guttmacher’s interactive map on state abortion policies contains additional information about current state abortion laws and restrictions on access. Definitions Gestational duration: An estimate of the length of time a person has been pregnant. This is typically defined as the number of weeks since the person’s last menstrual period (LMP), though some states define it as the number of weeks since conception. State legislation often uses gestational duration to define the arbitrary timelines of abortion bans and restrictions. Most state abortion statutes reference “probable gestational age,” which is typically determined by LMP; the weeks listed in the table below refer to LMP unless marked otherwise. Viability: A nonmedical term used to describe the point at which a fetus can survive outside the uterus, which is generally determined to be between 24 and 26 weeks LMP. Many statutory bans define limits on abortion based on the concept of viability. General health: Determined by a health care provider licensed to provide abortions and may include a pregnant person’s mental and emotional health. Physical health: Applies only to the physical function of the patient’s body and may even be restricted to major bodily functions. Lethal fetal anomaly: Fetal condition likely to be fatal before or shortly after birth. Highlights 41 states have abortion bans in effect (Table 1) with only limited exceptions (Table 2). 13 states have a total abortion ban. 28 states have abortion bans based on gestational duration. 7 states ban abortion at or before 18 weeks’ gestation. 21 states ban abortion at some point after 18 weeks. 9 states and the District of Columbia do not restrict abortion on the basis of gestational duration. Printer-friendly version Share Citations for State Bans on Abortion Citations for State Bans on Abortion- 9.1.26.xlsx For more information Public Policy Office 202 296-4012 [email protected] Topic United States Abortion : State Policies on Abortion Geography Northern America : United States Visit our state legislation tracker Go Table 1. Total Abortion Bans and Bans Based on Gestational Duration Currently in Effect Jurisdiction Total ban Bans in the first 18 weeks of pregnancy Bans after 18 weeks of pregnancy No ban or gestational limit Alabama X Alaska X Arizona Viability Arkansas X California Viability Colorado X Connecticut Viability Delaware Viability District of Columbia X Florida 6 weeks Georgia 6 weeks Hawaii Viability Idaho X Illinois Viability Indiana X Iowa 6 weeks Kansas 22 weeks Kentucky X Louisiana X Maine Viability Maryland X Massachusetts* 24 weeks Michigan X Minnesota X Mississippi X Missouri Viability Montana Viability Nebraska 12 weeks Nevada † 24 weeks (since fertilization) New Hampshire 24 weeks New Jersey X New Mexico X New York 24 weeks or viability (since commencement of pregnancy) North Carolina 12 weeks North Dakota X Ohio 20 weeks (since fertilization) Oklahoma X Oregon X Pennsylvania 24 weeks Rhode Island Viability South Carolina 6 weeks South Dakota X Tennessee X Texas X Utah 18 weeks Vermont X Virginia 3rd trimester Washington Viability West Virginia X Wisconsin 20 weeks (since fertilization) Wyoming Viability TOTAL 13 7 21 9 + DC *The statute in Massachusetts states that abortion is legal when “a pregnancy has existed for less than 24 weeks” and pregnancy is defined as “the presence of an implanted human embryo or fetus in the uterus.” † Nevada also criminalizes pregnant people for ending their own pregnancies after 24 weeks. Table 2. Exceptions to Bans Based on Gestational Duration Jurisdiction Threat to the life of the pregnant person Threat to the general health of the pregnant person Threat to the physical health of the pregnant person Pregnancy resulting from rape Pregnancy resulting from incest Diagnosis of lethal fetal anomaly Alabama X X X Arizona X X Arkansas X California X X Connecticut X X Delaware X X X Florida X X X (through 15 weeks) X (through 15 weeks) X (until 3rd trimester) Georgia X X X (through 20 weeks since fertilization) X (through 20 weeks since fertilization) X Hawaii X X Idaho* X X X X (through first trimester) X (through first trimester) Illinois† X X Indiana X (through 20 weeks since fertilization) X (through 20 weeks since fertilization) X (through 10 weeks since fertilization) X (through 10 weeks since fertilization) X (through 20 weeks since fertilization) Iowa‡ X X X (through 20 weeks since fertilization) X (through 20 weeks since fertilization) X (through 20 weeks since fertilization) Kansas X X Kentucky X X Louisiana X X X Maine† X Massachusetts X X X Mississippi X X Missouri X X Montana X X Nebraska X X X X Nevada X X New Hampshire X X X New York X X North Carolina X X X (through 20 weeks) X (through 20 weeks) X (through 24 weeks) North Dakota X X X (through 6 weeks) X (through 6 weeks) Ohio X X Oklahoma X Pennsylvania X X Rhode Island X X South Carolina X X X (through 12 weeks since conception) X (through 12 weeks since conception) X South Dakota X Tennessee X X Texas X X Utah X X X Virginia X X Washington X X West Virginia X X X (through 8 weeks since fertilization for adults, 14 weeks since fertilization for minors) X (through 8 weeks since fertilization for adults, 14 weeks since fertilization for minors) X Wisconsin X X Wyoming X X TOTAL 41 14 23 9 8 13 Notes: Table includes only those jurisdictions with policies relevant to this topic in effect. The inclusion of an exception in a policy banning abortion does not ensure there will be a provider available or willing to perform the procedure. The exceptions listed are for abortion bans that are in effect. Gestational duration limits that differ from the overall limit are noted and are in LMP unless otherwise stated. *On August 13, 2026, the United States District Court for the District of Idaho expanded Idaho’s exceptions to include threats to the physical health and general health of the pregnant person. However, a court later narrowed this ruling only to care provided by the physician plaintiff, meaning that only one provider is permitted to provide care under the expanded exceptions. †Maine allows for abortion after viability when a physician deems it necessary. In Illinois, the health of the patient encompasses “all factors that are relevant to the patient’s health and well-being, including, but not limited to, physical, emotional, psychological, and familial health and age.” In both states, the broad nature of the exceptions allows care to be provided later in pregnancy. ‡In Iowa, the rape and incest exceptions require sexual assault survivors to report the incident to law enforcement or a health agency within 45 days and survivors of incest to report the assault within 140 days. Suggested citation: Guttmacher Institute, State bans on abortion throughout pregnancy, State Laws and Policies (as of September 2026), 2026, https://www.guttmacher.org/state-policy/explore/state-policies-abortion-bans . Get updates on policy issues and more Sign Up Center facts. Shape policy. Advance sexual and reproductive rights. ® Donate Now Newsletter Signup Contact Us Facebook Instagram Youtube LinkedIn Contact Footer Privacy Policy Accessibility Statement © 2026 Guttmacher Institute. The Guttmacher Institute is registered as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization under the tax identification number 13-2890727. Contributions are tax deductible to the fullest extent allowable. 