Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 1 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
 
 
 
 
 
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL RULES 
 
WHEREAS, the Municipal Council of the City of Newark, New Jersey, wishes to establish rules of 
procedure of its meetings. 
 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED BY THE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF 
NEWARK, NEW JERSEY, THAT the following rules of procedure shall govern the conduct of 
meetings of the Municipal Council of the City of Newark, New Jersey: 
 
RULE I. GOVERNING RULES. 
 
  Except as may be provided in the charter, all questions of order, the methods of 
organization and the  conduct of business of the Municipal Council shall be governed by Robert’s 
Rules of Order, Newly Revised in all cases to which they are applicable as determined by the City 
Clerk as parliamentarian for the Municipal Council and in which they are not incon sistent with the 
following rules of the Council. 
 
RULE II. PRE-MEETING CONFERENCES. 
 
  The Municipal Council shall hold pre -meeting conferences at 10:00 a.m. on all days 
preceding the day on which a regular meeting of the Council is held. Provided, however , that when 
the day fixed for any pre -meeting conference of the Municipal Council falls upon a day designated 
by law as a legal, religious or national holiday, or in the event that it is known that a majority of the 
Municipal Council will not be available,  such conference shall be held on a succeeding day not a 
holiday, as established by the City Clerk, as secretary to the governing body, in the annual meeting 
notice. 
 
  The Pre-Meeting Conference shall convene in the Municipal Council Chamber, on the 
second floor in City Hall or the Council Conference Room on the third floor of City Hall to be 
determined by the City Clerk based on agenda items to be considered. 
 
  Pre-meeting conferences of the Municipal Council may be televised under the authority 
and permission of the Municipal Council. 
 
RULE III. REGULAR MEETING; PLACE OF MEETING. 
 
  The Municipal Council shall hold regular meetings on the first Wednesday of each 
month at 12:30 p.m. and the third Wednesday at 6:30 p.m. or as soon thereafter as is possible , 
except as hereinafter provided. However, only one regular meeting shall be held in the months of 
July and August on a date and time to be established by the City Clerk, as secretary to the governing 
body, in the annual meeting notice. Further when the da y fixed for any regular meeting of the 
Municipal Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal, religious or national holiday, or in 
the event that it is known that a majority of the Municipal Council will not be available, such meeting 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 2 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
shall be held on a succeeding day not a holiday as established by the City Clerk, as secretary to the 
governing body, in the annual meeting notice.  
 
All regular meetings of the Municipal Council shall be held in the Council Chamber on the second 
floor of City Hall except as hereinafter provided. The organization meeting of the Municipal Council 
held on July 1 st following the election of the Municipal C ouncil may be held in a facility selected by 
the City Clerk prior thereto for the convenience of the public. 
 
  Regular meetings of the Municipal Council may be televised under the authority and 
permission of the Municipal Council. 
 
RULE lV. SPECIAL CONFERENCES 
 
  The Municipal Council shall hold special conference meetings at 10:00 a.m. on the 
second and fourth Tuesday of each month except the months of July and August in which there shall 
be no special conference meeting. When the day fixed for any special  conference meeting of the 
Municipal Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal, religious or national holiday, or in 
the event that it is known that a majority of the Municipal Council will not be available, such special 
conference meeting shall be held on a succeeding day not a holiday as established by the City Clerk, 
as secretary to the governing body, in the annual meeting notice.  
 
  The special Conference meeting shall convene in the Municipal Council Conference 
Room, on the third floor in City Hall. 
 
RULE V. SPECIAL MEETINGS 
 
  A Special Meeting of the Municipal Council may be called by the Mayor, President of 
the Municipal Council or by a majority of the members of the Municipal Council. Whenever a Special 
Meeting shall be called, the person(s) calling for a Special Meeting shall serve in writing a notice on 
the City Clerk signed by those same person(s). Those person(s) at the time of a call for a Special 
Meeting must submit all legislation and supporting documents pertaining to the call of said meeting. 
The Clerk after receiving the call for a Special Meeting shall forthwith serve notice upon each 
member of the Municipal Council and the official newspaper(s), stating the date and hour of the 
meeting and purpose for which such meeting is called. No other business shall be transacted at any 
Special Meeting other than the items listed in the call letter of the Special Meeting. 
 
  All Special Meetings of the Municipal Council shall be held in the Council Chamber on 
the second floor of City Hall except as hereinafter provided. 
 
Special Meetings of the Municipal Council may be televised under  
the authority and permission of the Municipal Council. 
 
RULE VI. AGENDA. 
 
  All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, claims, licenses, contract s, 
documents or other matters to be submitted to the Municipal Council by the Mayor or Business 
Administrator shall, at least seventy-two (72) business hours prior to each regular Municipal Council 
Meeting, be delivered to the City Clerk, whereupon the Cit y Clerk shall immediately review the 
documents submitted for completeness. Should the City Clerk determine that the documents 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 3 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
submitted are not complete, he shall communicate with the originating agency to request that the 
information required to complete the documents be submitted. Once a document is deemed 
complete by the City Clerk, he shall submit copies to the President of the Municipal Council for his 
authorization to place the legislation on the agenda for the Municipal Council meeting. Upon receipt 
of the approval from the President of the Municipal Council the City Clerk shall prepare an agenda 
of such matters, except as otherwise directed by the President of the Municipal Council, or by a 
majority of the members of the Municipal Council, together with such additional matters that he may 
have to present, in conformity with the prescribed order of business as hereinafter provided and shall 
furnish a copy to each member of the Municipal Council.  
 
The Municipal Council shall neither consider nor take a ction on any matter submitted 
to the City Clerk within seventy -two (72) business hours prior to each Municipal Council meeting, 
unless such matter relates directly to a sudden and unforeseeable emergency affecting the public 
health, safety or welfare and certified as such an emergency by the Department Director or the 
Business Administrator. The certification shall state the reason for the emergency which requires 
legislation to be acted upon immediately as well as providing the reasons for the delay in submitting 
appropriate documentation in time for inclusion on the printed agenda. Such legislation shall be 
accompanied by a letter from the Mayor requesting that the legislation be considered as an “added 
starter”. The added starter legislation must be sign ed by the President of the Municipal Council 
before it can be added to the agenda. The appropriate department head or his designee shall appear 
before the Municipal Council to answer any questions regarding the added/late legislation. If the 
department head or designee is not in attendance to explain the added/late legislation, then the 
governing body shall not entertain said legislation until the next regular Municipal Council Meeting. 
 
When the Municipal Council has tabled or rejected any ordinance or resolution 
submitted by the Mayor or Business Administrator, at the request of the Administration, the Mayor 
or Business Administrator may resubmit such legislation at any time thereafter.  When the Municipal 
Council has tabled or rejected any ordinance  or resolution submitted by the Mayor or Business 
Administrator, absent a request by the Administration, the agenda shall not include any such 
ordinance or resolution for a period of one year immediately following the date of such tabling or 
rejection, without the prior consent of the Municipal Council.  
 
When an ordinance or resolution submitted by the Mayor or  Business Administrator, 
fails to gain the necessary votes for adoption during three meetings of the Municipal Council, the 
agenda shall not includ e any such ordinance or resolution for a period of one year immediately 
following the date of the third meeting of the Municipal Council, without the prior consent of the 
Municipal Council. Such legislation shall be returned to the originating agency. 
 
The City Clerk shall furnish the Mayor, Business Administrator,  Corporation Counsel, 
directors of the departments and all heads of divisions, with a copy of the agenda prior to the 
Municipal Council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit. 
 
A. It shall be the responsibility of the City Administration to ensure that 
legislation pertaining to the transfer, sale or purchase of City-owned 
real property which is forwarded to  the Municipal Council for its 
consideration state the use for which the property is to be transferred, 
sold or purchased; such legislation shall also cont ain a reverter  
clause stating the real property sold by the City shall revert to the 
City's ownership after one year from the effective date of the subject 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 4 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
legislation if the purchasing entity has not made substantial progress 
in the development of such real property. 
 
B. If the above information relating to th e purpose of the real property 
transfer, sale or purchase and/or the reverter c lause itself is not 
included  in proposed legislation when submitted to  the 
Municipal Council for its consideration, the City Clerk shall have the 
authorization to accept the legislation and not place same on the 
Municipal Council agenda until such information is forwarded by the 
City Administration. 
 
RULE VII. THE PRESIDING OFFICER-ELECTION AND DUTIES 
 
  The Presiding Officer of the Municipal Council shall be the President of the Municipal 
Council. He shall be elected at the organization meeting held on July 1st following the election of the 
Municipal Council. A Vice President of the Municipal Council shall also be elected at the organization 
meeting held on July 1st following the election of the Municipal Council who shall have the authority 
to function as the Presiding Officer, in the absence of the President. In the absence of the President 
and Vice President, the Municipal Council shall elect a temporary Presiding Officer who shall then 
preside over the Municipal Council. The President of the Municipa l Council shall assume the chair 
of Presiding Officer immediately after his election. The President of the Municipal Council shall 
preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings and conference meetings of 
the Municipal Council. The City Clerk shall state every question coming before the Municipal Council 
and announce the decision of the Municipal Council on all matters coming before it. A majority vote 
of the full statutory membership of the Municipal Council shall govern and conclusively determine all 
questions of adoption of legislation not otherwise herein covered. The Municipal Council President 
shall vote on all questions; his name being called last. The Municipal Council President shall sign all 
ordinances and resolutions adopted  by the Municipal Council during his presence. In the event of 
the absence of the president, such ordinances and resolutions shall be signed by the Vice President 
of the Municipal Council or the temporary Presiding Officer elected by the Municipal Council. 
 
RULE VIII. PARLIAMENTARIAN 
 
  The City Clerk or his designee in his absence shall act as parliamentarian and shall 
advise and assist the Presiding Officer in matters of parliamentary law. 
 
 
RULE IX. CORPORATION COUNSEL 
 
  The Corporation Counsel or such member(s) of her office as she may designate, shall 
be available to the Municipal Council at all regular and special meetings and conference meetings. 
The Corporation Counsel or her designee shall draft ordinances, resolutions or other legal 
documents when requested by the Municipal Council. 
 
RULE X. CALL TO ORDER 
 
  The President of the Municipal Council shall take the chair at the hour appointed for 
the regular meetings, special meetings or conference meetings and shall immediately call the 
Municipal Council to order. In the absence of the Municipal Council President the Municipal Council 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 5 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
Vice President, shall call the Municipal Council to order. In the absence of the Municipal Council 
President and Vice President the City Clerk shall call the Municipal Council to order. The City Clerk 
shall then determine if a quorum is present and in that event shall call for the election of a Temporary 
President. Upon the arrival of the President, the Temporary President shall forthwith relinquish the 
chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Municipal Council. 
 
RULE XI. OPENING ROLL CALL 
 
  Before proceeding with the business of the Municipal Council, the City Clerk, or his 
designee, shall call the roll of the members in alphabetical order and the n ames of those present 
shall be entered in the minutes. 
 
RULE XII. QUORUM 
 
  A majority of the full statutory membership of the Municipal Council shall constitute a 
quorum for all regular and special meetings. A quorum is not required for a conference meeting.  
 
Should no quorum attend within thirty (30) minutes after the hour appointed for the meeting of the 
Municipal Council, a majority of the Council Members present, the City Clerk, or his designee, may 
thereupon adjourn the meeting until another hour or day. 
 
  The name of the members present and their action at such meeting shall be recorded 
in the minutes by the City Clerk. 
 
RULE XIII. OPEN MEETING; ORDER OF BUSINESS 
   
  All pre-meetings, regular meetings, conference meetings and special meetings of th e 
Municipal Council shall be open to the public. At the hour set for each meeting, the Members of the 
Municipal Council and the City Clerk shall take their regular stations in the Council Chamber or the 
location called for in the New Jersey Open Public Mee tings Act announcement for a particular 
meeting; and at regular meetings and so far as practicable at special meetings, the business of the 
Municipal Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
   
1. Call to Order: National anthem  
2. Invocation 
  3.   New Jersey Open Public Meetings Act Declaration 
  4.   Roll Call 
  5.   Reports and recommendations 
  6.   Ordinances 
  7.   Resolutions and motions 
  8.   Communications 
  9.   Pending business on the agenda 
  10. Miscellaneous 
  11. Hearing of Citizens 
  12. Adjournment 
 
At the second regular meeting of the month, the business of the Municipal Council shall 
be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 6 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
1. Call to Order: National anthem and Invocation 
2. New Jersey Open Public Meetings Act Declaration 
3. Roll Call 
4. Hearing of Citizens 
5. Reports and recommendations 
6. Ordinances 
7. Resolutions and motions 
8. Communications 
9. Pending business on the agenda 
10.  Miscellaneous 
11.  Hearing of Citizens 
12.  Adjournment 
 
(7R9-E 062012) 
 
RULE XIV READING OF MINUTES 
 
  Minutes when signed by the Municipal Council President and the City Clerk shall be 
considered approved without reading, provided that the City Clerk, shall deliver a copy thereof to 
each member of the Municipal Council as soon as is practicable. 
 
RULE XV RULES OF DEBATE 
 
a) Questions under consideration. A question presented and seconded is under 
consideration and no motion shall be received  thereafter, except to adjourn, to 
lay on the table, to defer or to amend, until the question is decid ed. These 
motions shall have preference in the order in which they are made and the first 
two (2) shall be decided without debate. There shall be no debate on a motion 
to table any legislation before the Municipal Council. Any l egislation that has 
been tabled by a vote of the Municipal  Council may only be removed from the 
table by the members of the  Municipal Council that spon sored the original 
motion. 
 
b) Participation by the Municipal Council President. The Municipal Council 
President, or such other member of the Municipal Council as may be presiding 
may move, second or debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of 
debate as  are by these rules imposed upon all members and shall not be 
deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Municipal Council Member by 
reason of his being Presiding Officer. 
 
c) Getting the floor.  Improper reference to be avoided. Every Council Member 
desiring to speak for any purpose whatsoever shall address the Presiding 
Officer and upon recognition, shall confine himself to the question under debate, 
avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. A Council Member may only 
speak once on the same subject but may speak to clear up a matter of fact or 
explain a material part of his speech. 
 
d) Interruptions. A Council Member once recognized, shall not be  interrupted 
when speaking unless it is to call him to order or as herein otherwise provided. 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 7 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
If a Council Member while spe aking should be called to order he shall cease 
speaking until the question of order is determined by the Presiding Officer and 
if in order he shall be permitted to proceed. Any Council Member may appeal to 
the Municipal Council from a decision  of the Presiding Officer upon a question 
of order, whereupon without debate the Presiding Officer shall submit to the 
Municipal Council the question, "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained," 
and the Municipal Council shall decide the question by a majority vote. 
 
e) Privilege of closing debate. The Council Member moving the adoption of an 
ordinance, resolution or motion shall have the privilege of closing debate. 
 
RULE XVI. ROLL CALL FOR VOTING. 
 
  Upon any roll call there shal l be no discussion or explanation given by any Council 
Member voting, and he shall vote "yes" or "no" unless he shall first receive special permission from 
a majority of the Municipal Council to explain his vote. A Council Member may abstain from voting 
on any matter, such abstention shall not be counted as a yes or no vote but shall be recorded in the 
minutes. The vote upon every ordinance, resolution or motion shall be taken by roll call in 
alphabetical order except that the Presiding Officer shall be the  last member called, and the vote 
shall be entered in the minutes. 
 
RULE XVII. ADDRESSING THE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL: TIME LIMIT 
 
  The Newark Municipal Council hereby affirms and supports the right of citizens to 
speak at public meetings of the Municipal Council in accordance with the Municipal Council's own 
rules of procedure and any applicable statues of the State of New Jersey. 
 
   A hearing of citizens shall be held during the course of each regular meeting of the 
Municipal Council as set forth in Rule III. 
   
  Any person may be permitted to address the Municipal Council during the Hearing of 
Citizens session, provided that notice by such person is given to the Office of the City Clerk by either 
personal appearance, mailed correspondence or facsimile n o earlier than 8:30 A.M. on the day 
following the Municipal Council meeting but no later than 4:00 12:00 P.M.(Noon) on the Monday 
Friday preceding the Municipal Council meeting at which the individual wishes to speak. The first 
twenty-five (25) persons to register by the closing deadline will be eligible to speak during the Hearing 
of Citizens for the up -coming Municipal Council meeting. Once the Hearing of Citizens has 
commenced and the roll call of the list of speakers has begun, anyone who is not present  or who 
does not respond at the time his name is called, shall be deemed as “not appearing” and his name 
shall not be recalled at a later time to address the Council at that session. Those persons wishing to 
address the Municipal Council shall provide by t he above deadline the following information to the 
Office of the City Clerk: signature, printed legal name, place of residence, which shall not include a 
Post Office Box, day and evening telephone numbers and the nature or subject of the proposed 
topic. The City Clerk, or his designee shall have the authority to modify any proposed topic in order 
to avoid personally insulting, defamatory, malicious or derogatory statements on the list of speakers 
for the Hearing of Citizens. (7R8-e(as) 012319) 
 
The registration form for spea kers for the Hearing of Citizens session shall contain a 
statement of the rules of decorum for the Hearing of Citizens. It shall also include a statement that 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 8 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
the individual understands the rules of decorum for the Hearing of Citizens, acknowledges and 
agrees to conduct in accordance with the rules. This statement shall be signed by all persons wishing 
to speak at the Hearing of Citizens. Any person refusing to sign this statement shall not be placed 
on the list of speakers for the Hearing of Citizens. Any person who signs this statement but fails to 
abide by the rules shall not be permitted to register to speak at a Hearing of Citizens for the 
succeeding two (2) Municipal Council Meetings nor shall such person be recognized as a speaker 
in the public speaking period following a pre -meeting, conference meeting or Special meeting until 
they are eligible to speak at a Hearing of Citizens. Any person so barred from speaking who upon 
regaining eligibility to speak at a Hearing of Citizens again violates the rules  of decorum, shall be 
barred from speaking at future Hearing of Citizens for a period to be established by the Presiding 
Officer. 
 
All speakers during the Hearing of Citizens shall be permitted five (5) minutes to speak. 
 
  Prior to the conclusion of a pre -meeting conference, there shall be allocated a period 
of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes wherein citizens may address the Municipal Council on any 
topic relevant to any Newark municipal government issue. Each individual speaker shall be limited 
to a maximum time period of three (3) minutes. Any person present at the pre -meeting, may speak 
within the limitation herein established. The Presiding Officer will select the person to be given the 
floor and establish the order of speaking. 
 
  Prior to the c onclusion of a special conference meeting, there shall be allocated a 
period of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes wherein citizens may address the Municipal Council 
on any topic relevant to any Newark municipal government issue. Each individual speake r shall be 
limited to a maximum time period of three (3) minutes. Any person present at the special conference 
meeting, may speak within the limitation herein established. The Presiding Officer will select the 
person to be given the floor and establish the order of speaking. 
 
  Prior to the conclusion of a special meeting, there shall be allocated a period of time 
not to exceed thirty (30) minutes wherein citizens may address the Municipal Council on any topic 
relevant to any Newark municipal government iss ue. Each individual speaker shall be limited to a 
maximum time period of three (3) minutes. Any person present at the special meeting, may speak 
within the limitation herein established. The Presiding Officer will select the person to be given the 
floor and establish the order of speaking. 
 
In the event that a special meeting and a special conference  meeting are held on the 
same day, there shall be only one (1) thirty (30) minute period allowed for comments by public 
speakers. 
 
  Any person addressing the Municipal Council during a public hearing for an Ordinance 
on Public Hearing, Second Reading and Final Passage, shall confine his remarks to the specifics of 
the Ordinance in question. No other matter may be discussed. Speakers will be permitted three (3) 
minutes to address the Municipal Council on the Ordinance. 
    
  Notwithstanding the separation of powers between the Executive and Legislative 
branches of the Newark Municipal government under state law, the Municipal Council may request, 
through the Mayor or Business Administrator, that representatives of the City Administration be 
present during all Hearing of Citizens sessions. 
 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 9 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
 
RULE XVIII. MANNER OF ADDRESSING THE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL 
 
  Each person addressing the Municipal Council at Regular Meetings, Special Meetings, 
Hearing of Citizens and Ordinances on Public Hearing, second reading and Final Passage, shall 
step up to the microphone, shall give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record 
and shall limit his comments to the time period established in RULE XVII.  The speaker shall face 
forward and all remarks shall be addressed to the Presiding Officer and Municipal Council as a body 
and not to an individual Municipal Council Member or the audience. A Municipal Council Member 
shall not interrupt a speaker during his speaking time, except the Presiding Officer for parliamentary 
purposes only.  
 
Questions for which a speaker is seeking answers, must be provided in writing by the 
speaker to the City Clerk or his designee and he shall prepare a written response to the question 
and submit it to the requestor within ten (10) business days. For the purpose of clarity, the first day 
of the ten (10) day response time shall be the day following the Municipal Council meeting in which 
the question was presented.  
 
Should a Municipal Council Member wish to respond to a speaker’s remarks during 
the Municipal Council meeting he shall limit his response and/or remarks to three (3) minutes. A 
Council Member may not respond to a speaker's comments before the speaker has concluded his 
remarks and returned to his seat.  
  
  The Hearing of Citizens Session affords citizens an opportunity to speak on matters of 
interest pertaining to the City of Newark and its residents. The Council however intends to preserve 
order and proper decorum at all times during the Hearing of Citizens. A spe aker must at all times 
conduct himself in a manner which avoids disorderly conduct or behavior, not make comments that 
are excessively loud, disruptive, obscene or otherwise in violation of applicable law, or make 
statements directed at Council Members or City Officials that are defamatory  or malicious. The 
Presiding Officer may interrupt or terminate any individual’s speaking privilege if these rules are 
violated and further may prohibit requests from such individual to register and speak at future 
Municipal Council meetings in accordance with RULE XVI.  
 
When a speaker’s name is called he must promptly come up to the podium and begin 
his remarks. Citizens attending the public meeting of the Municipal Council shall remain seated at 
all times unless he is the speaker at the podium. 
 
RULE XlX. DECORUM 
 
(A). By Municipal Council Members.  While the Municipal Council is in session, the 
Members must preserve order and decorum. A Council Member shall not, by 
conversation or otherwise, except as herein otherwise provided, delay or interrupt 
the proceedings or the peace of the Municipal Council, or disturb any members 
while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the Municipal Council or its Presiding 
Officer. While the Municipal Council is in session, public cerem onies shall be 
limited to the National Anthem and Invocation as provided in the order of business 
on the agenda.  
 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 10 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
 The presentation of commending resolutions shall take place prior to the official 
start of the regular Municipal Council meeting. 
 
(B). By other persons. No person shall by noisy or disorderly conduct disturb or 
interfere with the quiet good order of a meeting of the Municipal Council. Any 
person who has been declared out of order by the Presiding Officer and has been 
asked to cease speaki ng and to sit down, shall comply immediately or he shall 
forthwith be removed from the meeting, unless permission to continue or again 
address the Municipal Council is granted by the majority vote of the Municipal 
Council.  
 
(C) No person, unless they are a bonafide law enforcement officer, shall enter the 
Municipal Council Chamber with any items which may be construed as being a 
potential weapon. Further, persons who have been called upon to address the 
Members of the Municipal Council shall be prohibited from approaching the 
Municipal Council rail with any items which could be used for the concealment of 
any substance or weapons. 
 
(D).  Enforcement. The Chief of the Police Department or her designee(s) shall be the 
sergeant-at-arms of the Municipal Council meetings. She shall carry out all orders 
and instructions given by the Presiding Officer for the purpose of maintaining order 
and decorum at the Municipal Council meetings. 
 
(E). Use of cameras and recording devices; limited.  Cameras, including television 
and motion picture cameras, electronic sound recording devices and any other 
mechanical electrical or electronic recording devices may be used, but only such 
in a manner as will cause no interference or disturbance of the proceedings of the 
Municipal Council. 
 
 Supplemental lighting for cameras, including television and motion picture 
cameras shall be used only in exercise of extreme discretion in regard to the 
intensity and duration of such lighting with a view to creating the least amount of 
disturbance to the proceedings of the Municipal Council and the least amount of 
discomfort to the members of the public in attendance. 
 
 The Municipal Council may by a two-thirds vote of the full authorized membership 
of the Municipal Council thereof, prohibit the pr esence of cameras and recording 
devices hereinabove granted when the Municipal Council determines that the 
presence of cameras and recording devices is unreasonably interfering with or 
disturbing the proceedings of the Municipal Council. 
 
RULE XX. PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO BE WITHIN THE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL RAIL. 
 
 No person except the City Clerk and his representatives shall be permitted within the 
rail in front of the Municipal Council or be permitted to disturb any Municipal Council 
Member while on the dais, dur ing any meeting without the express permission of the 
Municipal Council. 
 
 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 11 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
RULE XXl. SPECIAL COMMITTEES. 
 
 All Special Committees and the Chairperson thereof, shall be appointed by the 
Presiding Officer at a regular or special meeting or by written notice to the City Clerk. 
 
A Special Committee shall consist of not more than four (4) members of the Municipal 
Council including the Presiding Officer who shall be a member ex-officio of all Special Committees; 
provided, however, that the Presiding Officer may appoint a Special Committee consisting of all the 
Members of the Municipal Council. The Budget Committee shall at all times be a committee of the 
full Municipal Council. A quorum of each Special Committee appointed shall consist of a majority of 
the members thereof. 
 
Meetings of Special Committees shall be held at such times as not to conflict with pre-
meetings, regular meetings or conference meetings. 
 
RULE XXlI. STANDING COMMITTEES 
 
The only standing committee shall be the committee of the whole,  and rules of 
procedures in the Municipal Council shall also be observed in the committee of the whole as far as 
applicable. 
 
RULE XXIIl. ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS AND CONTRACT  
DOCUMENTS. 
 
(A) Preparation of ordinances and resolutions.  The Corporation Counsel or her 
designee shall prepare ordinances, resolutions, or other legal documents when 
requested by the Municipal Council which shall be delivered to the City Clerk in 
conformity with Rule Vl. A copy of same shall be forthwith furnished t o each member 
of the Municipal Council by the City Clerk. All ordinance and resolutions submitted shall 
contain within its body, at the end, a section entitled “Statement” which shall contain a 
plain language and concise summary of the intent of said legis lation for the general 
public to understand. 
 
 Ordinances shall be introduced and adopted in conformance with State statues of the 
State of New Jersey.  
 
(B) Prior approvals . All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents before 
presentation to the Mun icipal Council by the Mayor or Business Administrator, shall 
have been reduced to writing and shall be approved as to form and legality by the 
Corporation Counsel or her designee. Prior to such presentation all such documents, 
may be first referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the 
administration of the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution or contract document 
would devolve. When examined and approved by the department head and the 
Corporation Counsel, the Mayor, Business Adm inistrator or his respective designee 
may be required to affix his signature on the document certifying to the factual content. 
 
(C)      Introducing for passage or approval. Ordinances, resolutions and other matters and 
subjects requiring action by the Municipal Council must be introduced and sponsored 
by a Member of the Municipal Council except that the Mayor or Business Administrator 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 12 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
           may present under Rule Vl, ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to 
the Municipal Council, and any Council  Member may assume sponsorship thereof by 
moving that such  ordinance, resolution, matter or subject be adopted in accordance 
with law; otherwise they shall not be considered. In the event that all Members of the 
Municipal Council wish to sponsor an item before the body for consideration the motion 
shall be Council-of-the Whole. 
 
When a Council Member assumes sponsorship of an ordinance or resolution his 
name shall appear in the space provided thereon. 
 
(D) Adoption. Except as may otherwise be provided by State law resolutions and motions 
shall require five (5) affirmative votes for adoption. Ordinances other than bond and  
appropriation ordinances shall require five (5) affirmative votes for adoption. Bond and 
appropriation ordinance shall require six (6) affirmative votes for adoption. Resolutions 
creating emergency appropriations  and budgetary transfers shall require six  (6) 
affirmative votes for adoption. 
 
(E) Veto by the Mayor. Ordinances vetoed by the Mayor shall require six (6) affirmative 
votes to override the veto. Following a vote to override a veto by the Mayor, should the 
Municipal Council vote be successful, the City Clerk shall provide notice of the override 
to the Mayor, Business Administrator and Corporation Council as soon as practicable. 
 
(F) Certification of passage of ordinance over mayor's veto. Whenever an ordinance 
has been vetoed by the Mayor and is passed by the Municipal Council over such veto 
in the manner provided by law, the City Clerk shall append to such ordinance a 
certification in substantially the following form: 
 
  "I hereby certify that the above ordinance adopted by the Municipal Council 
of the City Newark on the ____ day of ____, was vetoed by the Mayor of the City, 
and was passed over the said veto on the ____ day of  
 
Dated: 
        City Clerk" 
 
 
RULE XXIV. NOMINATIONS AND ACTIONS THEREON. 
   
  All nominations to any office or position submitted to the Municipal Council shall be in 
writing and include the nominee's full name, home address and occupation. Upon receipt from the 
Mayor or Municipal Council of any nomination, the same shall be read under "Communications" by 
the City Clerk or his designee, and unless otherwise ordered, shall be considered by the Municipal 
Council under "New Business". When taken up for action the Presiding Officer shall put the question 
on each nomination as follows: "Will the Municipal Council confirm the nomination?" On that motion 
a vote shall be ordered, and if five (5) or more members vote to confirm, the Presiding Officer shall 
announce "The nomination is confirmed." If less than five (5) members vote to confirm, the Presiding 
Officer shall ann ounce "The nomination is rejected." Action of confirmation or rejection, upon a 
nomination made by the Mayor or by the Municipal Council shall not be postponed or delayed longer 
than one (1) regular meeting. Following a postponement should no action be taken on the nomination 
Rules adopted via 7R9-D 020112     Page 13 of 13 
Amended thru 7R9-E 062012 and 7R8-e(as) 012319 
or the nomination fail to receive the required votes for adoption, the nomination shall be considered 
as having been rejected by the Municipal Council. 
 
  Prior to the confirmation of a nominee, the Mayor shall cause the Police Department 
to conduct an investigation and background check of said nominee to verify that he has no criminal 
record. If this investigation discloses evidence of a criminal record, the nomination shall not be 
considered by the Municipal Council. 
 
  Within two (2) days after confirmation or rejection of a nomination by the Municipal 
Council, the City Clerk shall in writing notify the Mayor of that fact. 
 
RULE XXV. REPORTS AND RESOLUTIONS TO BE FILED WITH CITY CLERK. 
  All reports and resolutions shall be filed with the City Clerk and entered in the minutes. 
 
RULE XXVl. ADJOURNMENT. 
  A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. 